PSP migration guide. (#103)
kubewarden/docs: src/psp-migration.md

# How to migrate from Kubernetes PSPs to Kubewarden policies?

> Kubewarden can be used to replace all deprecated [PodSecurityPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/). Different from the PSPs, Kubewarden has separated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubewarden can be used to replace all deprecated [PodSecurityPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/). In contrast with the PSPs, Kubewarden has separate
```

> Kubewarden can be used to replace all deprecated [PodSecurityPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/). Different from the PSPs, Kubewarden has separated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubewarden can be used to replace all deprecated [PodSecurityPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/). In contrast with the PSPs, Kubewarden has separate
```

> Kubewarden can be used to replace all deprecated [PodSecurityPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/). Different from the PSPs, Kubewarden has separated

Author: I was not trying to tell that Kubewarden is better or worst. It's just how it works. I believe this is a result of the gradual process of creating policies to cover the PSPs configuration. And, I think individual policies allow more granular control of what the operator wanna to validate. But I'm not sure if we should add this discussion in this how-to guide. What do you think @divya-mohan0209 ? Should I explain why we use different policies?

> Kubewarden can be used to replace all deprecated [PodSecurityPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/). Different from the PSPs, Kubewarden has separated

Reviewer 2: I understand your point. What I wanted to understand was if there are any explicit benefits of not clustering policies together in a PSP because we have mentioned that as a statement in this section. If there are none, that is fine. But if we can supplement with a benefit, that'd be good is all.

> Kubewarden can be used to replace all deprecated [PodSecurityPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/). Different from the PSPs, Kubewarden has separated

Author: I've pushed one more sentence trying to give some benefits of this approach. Please, give me your feedback.

> policies to achieve the same goal of different fields from the PSPs. The policies to cover each of the PSP configuration fields can be found below in the [mapping table](#mapping-kuberwarden-policies-to-psp-fields).

Reviewer: Nit: I would drop this line to be fair, and assume that they can find it on their own (my personal preference is as shorter docs as possible, sometimes to the extreme..).

> policies to achieve the same goal of different fields from the PSPs. The policies to cover each of the PSP configuration fields can be found below in the [mapping table](#mapping-kuberwarden-policies-to-psp-fields).

Reviewer: Nit: I would drop this line to be fair, and assume that they can find it on their own (my personal preference is as shorter docs as possible, sometimes to the extreme..).

Reviewer 2: We can drop it and have a pre-requisites section linking the installation section to this doc instead of an explicit mention.

Author: As a how-to guide, I guess we can assume that user know how to install Kuberwarden and has a running cluster ready to be used. Does it make sense?

Reviewer: I'm happy assuming, and I suppose they will have an "installing Kubewarden" on the left of the page on the sections at some point.

> 

Author: Marking this as resolved to keep the discussion about this [here](https://github.com/kubewarden/docs/pull/103/files#r854071351)

> To start deploying the Kubewarden policies to replace the PSPs, you need to install Kubewarden in your cluster. For that, please, refer to

Reviewer: Nit: 

```suggestion
To start deploying the Kubewarden policies to replace the PSPs, you need to install Kubewarden in your cluster. For that, refer to
```

(https://developers.google.com/style/tone#politeness-and-use-of-please)

> To start deploying the Kubewarden policies to replace the PSPs, you need to install Kubewarden in your cluster. For that, please, refer to

Reviewer: Nit: 

```suggestion
To start deploying the Kubewarden policies to replace the PSPs, you need to install Kubewarden in your cluster. For that, refer to
```

(https://developers.google.com/style/tone#politeness-and-use-of-please)

metadata:
  name: restricted
spec:
  allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
  runAsUser:
    rule: MustRunAsNonRoot
  supplementalGroups:
    rule: MustRunAs
    ranges:
      - min: 1000
        max: 65535
  privileged: false
  hostNetwork: false
  hostIPC: false
  hostPID: false
  hostPorts:
    - min: 443
      max: 443
```

Now, it's necessary to create the Kuberwarden policies to archive the same goal. It will be necessary 4 different policies. One for the user and group configuration, one for the host namespace, one for the privileged escalation and another for the privileged container configuration.

Let's start by blocking container escalation. For that you can deploy a policy like this:

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: psp-allowprivilegeescalation
spec:
  module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/allow-privilege-escalation-psp:v0.1.11
  rules:
    - apiGroups:
        - ""
      apiVersions:
        - v1
      resources:
        - pods
      operations:
        - CREATE
        - UPDATE
  mutating: false
  settings:
    default_allow_privilege_escalation: false
EOF
```

> Once this policy start to run, it will block pods trying to escalate its permissions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you notice, we have specified `default_allow_privilege_escalation` to assume a value `false`. Once this policy starts running, it will restrict pods trying to run with more privileges than the parent container by default.
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true
  - name: sidecar
    image: sidecar
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-allowprivilegeescalation.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: one of the containers has privilege escalation enabled
```

Now, to enforce the user and groups configuration, you can use the [user-group-psp](https://github.com/kubewarden/user-group-psp-policy) policy

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: psp-usergroup
spec:
  module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/user-group-psp:v0.2.0
  rules:
    - apiGroups:
        - ""
      apiVersions:
        - v1
      resources:
        - pods
      operations:
        - CREATE
        - UPDATE
  mutating: true
  settings:
    run_as_user:
      rule: MustRunAsNonRoot
    supplemental_groups:
      rule: MustRunAs
      ranges:
        - min: 1000
          max: 65535
EOF
```

> Notice the policy is configured as `mutation: true`. This is required because the policy will add supplemental user groups when the user does not define them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice the policy is configured as `mutation: true`. This is required because the policy will add [supplementalGroups](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/#users-and-groups) when the user does not define them.
```

So, now users cannot deploy pods running as root:

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      runAsNonRoot: false
      runAsUser: 0
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-usergroup-fb836.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: RunAsNonRoot should be set to true
```

```console
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      runAsNonRoot: true
      runAsUser: 0
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-usergroup-fb836.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: Invalid user ID: cannot run container with root ID (0)
```

>  And a group should be added when not defined:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, the example below also demonstrates the addition a [Supplemental group](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/#users-and-groups), despite it not being defined by us.
```

```console
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
EOF
pod/nginx created
$ kubectl get pods -o json nginx | jq ".spec.securityContext"
{
  "supplementalGroups": [
    10000
  ]
}

```

> To replace the PSP configuration to block privileged containers it's necessary to deploy the pod-privileged policy. This policy does not require any settings, once running, it will block pod privileged pods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To replace the PSP configuration that blocks privileged containers, it's necessary to deploy the [pod-privileged policy](https://github.com/kubewarden/pod-privileged-policy). This policy does not require any settings. Once running, it will block privileged pods.
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: psp-privileged
spec:
  module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:v0.1.10
  rules:
    - apiGroups:
        - ""
      apiVersions:
        - v1
      resources:
        - pods
      operations:
        - CREATE
        - UPDATE
  mutating: false
  settings: null
EOF
```

> To test the policy, we can try to run a pod with the privileged configuration enabled:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test the policy, we can try running a pod with privileged configuration enabled:
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
    securityContext:
      privileged: true
  - name: sleeping-sidecar
    image: alpine
    command: ["sleep", "1h"]
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-privileged.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: User 'system:admin' cannot schedule privileged containers
```

> To finish the migration of the PSP. It's necessary to disable host namespace sharing. As all the previous before, we can use another policy for that, the `host-namespace-psp`. It allow the cluster administrator block IPC, PID and Network namespaces individually. As well as set which ports the pods can export.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To finish the migration of the PSP. It's necessary to disable host namespace sharing. As all the previous before, we can use another policy for that, the `host-namespace-psp`. It allow the cluster administrator block IPC, PID and Network namespaces individually. As well as set which ports the pods can export.
```
```suggestion
To finish the migration of the PSP, it's necessary to disable host namespace sharing. Like the previous examples, we can use another policy for that, the `host-namespace-psp`. It allows the cluster administrator to block IPC, PID and Network namespaces individually. As well as set which ports the pods can export.
```

> To finish the migration of the PSP. It's necessary to disable host namespace sharing. As all the previous before, we can use another policy for that, the `host-namespace-psp`. It allow the cluster administrator block IPC, PID and Network namespaces individually. As well as set which ports the pods can export.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To complete the PSP migration exercise, it's necessary to disable host namespace sharing. To do that, we shall be using the [`host-namespace-psp` policy](https://github.com/kubewarden/host-namespaces-psp-policy). It allows the cluster administrator to block IPC, PID, and network namespaces individually and set the ports  that the pods can export.
```

Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-hostnamespaces.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: Pod has IPC enabled, but this is not allowed
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  hostIPC: false
  hostNetwork: true
  hostPID: false
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
  - name: sleeping-sidecar
    image: alpine
    command: ["sleep", "1h"]
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-hostnamespaces.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: Pod has host network enabled, but this is not allowed
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  hostIPC: false
  hostNetwork: false
  hostPID: true
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
  - name: sleeping-sidecar
    image: alpine
    command: ["sleep", "1h"]
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-hostnamespaces.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: Pod has host PID enabled, but this is not allowed
```

> And the pod can export only the port 443:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pod should be only able to expose the port 443 and should throw an error when port numbers are configured against the hostPort section.
```

# How to migrate from Kubernetes PSPs to Kubewarden policies?
With the removal of [PodSecurityPolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/)
in Kubernetes v1.25, you can leverage Kubewarden for admission control on your Kubernetes clusters.

> In contrast with the PSPs, Kubewarden has separate policies to achieve the same goal of different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contrasting with the PSPs, Kubewarden has separate policies to achieve the same goal. Therefore, each Kubewarden policy could be likened to a different
```

> fields from the PSPs. The policies to cover each of the PSP configuration fields can be found below

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configuration within the spec of a PSP. A mapping of the PSP configuration fields to their respective policies can be found below
```

in the [mapping table](#mapping-kuberwarden-policies-to-psp-fields).

Once you have the Kubewarden instance running, it's time to deploy some policies to replace the `PodSecurityPolicy` object. Start by listing

> the PSPs in use. For the sake of this example, a PSP disabling privileged escalation, privileged containers, blocking pods running as root, forcing a particular user group, blocking host namespaces and allowing pod to use the port 443 only has been considered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the PSPs in use. For the sake of this example, the following enforcements have been considered:

- a PSP disabling privileged escalation
- privileged containers
- blocking pods running as root
- forcing a particular user group
- blocking host namespaces 
- allowing pod to use the port 443 only

```

The yaml definition of the aforementioned PSP would look like the below:

```console
apiVersion: policy/v1beta1
kind: PodSecurityPolicy
metadata:
  name: restricted
spec:
  allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
  runAsUser:
    rule: MustRunAsNonRoot
  supplementalGroups:
    rule: MustRunAs
    ranges:
      - min: 1000
        max: 65535
  privileged: false
  hostNetwork: false
  hostIPC: false
  hostPID: false
  hostPorts:
    - min: 443
      max: 443
```

> Let's create Kuberwarden policies to achieve the same goal. One thing that you need to know about Kubewarden policies is that every rule will be enforced by a separate policies. In our example, one policy each will be required for the user and group configuration, for the host namespace, for the privileged escalation and for the privileged container configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's create Kuberwarden policies to achieve the same goal. One thing that you need to know about Kubewarden policies is that every rule will be enforced by a separate policy. In our example, one policy each will be required for the user and group configuration, for the host namespace, for the privileged escalation and for the privileged container configuration.
```

      rule: MustRunAs
      ranges:
        - min: 1000
          max: 65535
EOF
```

Notice the policy is configured as `mutation: true`. This is required because the policy will add [supplementalGroups](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/#users-and-groups) when the user does not define them.

So, now users cannot deploy pods running as root:

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      runAsNonRoot: false
      runAsUser: 0
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-usergroup-fb836.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: RunAsNonRoot should be set to true
```

```console
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      runAsNonRoot: true
      runAsUser: 0
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-usergroup-fb836.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: Invalid user ID: cannot run container with root ID (0)
```

> Additionally, the example below also demonstrates the addition a [Supplemental group](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/#users-and-groups), despite it not being defined by us.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, the example below also demonstrates the addition of a [Supplemental group](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/security/pod-security-policy/#users-and-groups), despite it not being defined by us.
```

Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-hostnamespaces.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: Pod has IPC enabled, but this is not allowed
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  hostIPC: false
  hostNetwork: true
  hostPID: false
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
  - name: sleeping-sidecar
    image: alpine
    command: ["sleep", "1h"]
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-hostnamespaces.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: Pod has host network enabled, but this is not allowed
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  hostIPC: false
  hostNetwork: false
  hostPID: true
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
  - name: sleeping-sidecar
    image: alpine
    command: ["sleep", "1h"]
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-hostnamespaces.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: Pod has host PID enabled, but this is not allowed
```

> The pod should be only able to expose the port 443 and should throw an error when port numbers are configured against the hostPort section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pod should be only able to expose the port 443 and should throw an error when other port numbers are configured against the hostPort section.
```

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: policies.kubewarden.io/v1alpha2
kind: ClusterAdmissionPolicy
metadata:
  name: psp-allowprivilegeescalation
spec:
  module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/allow-privilege-escalation-psp:v0.1.11
  rules:
    - apiGroups:
        - ""
      apiVersions:
        - v1
      resources:
        - pods
      operations:
        - CREATE
        - UPDATE
  mutating: false
  settings:
    default_allow_privilege_escalation: false
EOF
```

If you notice, we have specified `default_allow_privilege_escalation` to assume a value `false`. Once this policy starts running, it will restrict pods trying to run with more privileges than the parent container by default.

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: true
  - name: sidecar
    image: sidecar
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-allowprivilegeescalation.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: one of the containers has privilege escalation enabled
```

> Now, to enforce the user and groups configuration, you can use the [user-group-psp](https://github.com/kubewarden/user-group-psp-policy) policy

Reviewer 2: This is a nit because other policies have the word policy also hyperlinked. We can either delink them or link this one.
```suggestion
Now, to enforce the user and groups configuration, you can use the [user-group-psp policy](https://github.com/kubewarden/user-group-psp-policy)
```

spec:
  module: registry://ghcr.io/kubewarden/policies/pod-privileged:v0.1.10
  rules:
    - apiGroups:
        - ""
      apiVersions:
        - v1
      resources:
        - pods
      operations:
        - CREATE
        - UPDATE
  mutating: false
  settings: null
EOF
```

To test the policy, we can try running a pod with privileged configuration enabled:

```console
$ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
spec:
  containers:
  - name: nginx
    image: nginx
    imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
    securityContext:
      privileged: true
  - name: sleeping-sidecar
    image: alpine
    command: ["sleep", "1h"]
EOF
Error from server: error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "clusterwide-psp-privileged.kubewarden.admission" denied the request: User 'system:admin' cannot schedule privileged containers
```

To complete the PSP migration exercise, it's necessary to disable host namespace sharing.
To do that, we shall be using the [`host-namespace-psp` policy](https://github.com/kubewarden/host-namespaces-psp-policy).
It allows the cluster administrator to block IPC, PID, and network namespaces individually and set the ports

> that the pods can export.

Reviewer 2: I think expose is the better term here? We're not exporting the host ports AFAIK.
```suggestion
that the pods can be exposed on the host IP.
```
